welcome back ladies and gentlemen zloz
LeMond comer yet again china history
podcast the history of china vietnam
relations part two this time last
episode we flew higher than an sr-71
over the landscape
taking in the earliest centuries of
Vietnamese history the Hong Bang dynasty
the emergence of a lock and the lock
people the arrival of the chiyan army's
the establishment of a fort or commander
ii a jun to control the region for
imperial china then the Qin fell which
led to the rise of child hua Zhu da and
the establishment of the Nonya Nam Viet
Kingdom and for the first time the Red
River Delta region gets a fully loaded
adult dosage of Chinese culture the jus
dynasty of nan yet fell to the mighty
Han 111 BCE and for the first time the
Vietnamese people fall under China's
thumb during this first period of
Chinese domination 111 BCE marks the
commencement of the BOK pool there's a
momentary breath of fresh air with the
Jun sisters who shake off Han rule and
for TCE but this is over in a few short
years and the Chinese returned for the
second time to reassert themselves over
this land that today comprises only the
northernmost portion of today's
Socialist Republic of Vietnam from
almost the city of way north to the
China border and this is where we shall
return to our story last time we looked
at child hua a man who hailed originally
from ho Bay
Chao state this time we look at sure
ship a Han Chinese with roots in
Shandong but who was born six
generations deep into the world of JAL
province Jojo
born and raised in Vietnam the
Vietnamese no-shoe Xie as senior and
also as see moon King see he lived 137
at 226 early Han to early Three Kingdoms
period in China the record of the three
kingdoms
son Gorger is where we get most of the
skinny I'm sure she being 6th generation
Chow sure and all he came from a very
respected and influential family sure
she I had a classical upbringing
studying in law young the eastern Han
capital going through the whole
classical scholar official routine we
remember xuxa for his long stint serving
as administrator of chow chow
one of the commanders of JAL province
beginning in 177 he was the shelter
title a shawl was an is an archaic term
for the head of a Prefecture he's famous
for designing this architecture for the
way he governed JAL
we're by all the best of Chinese culture
that was applicable to this faraway
region could be integrated into the
indigenous Red River Delta cultures he
carried forward a lot of what had begun
under child war it was sure Shia who had
moved the old
Nonya capital from pon you to long being
on the Red River today part of Hanoi
located right at the fork in the river
where the red and dulin rivers joined
very quickly this became a thriving
trade center and a mini Chung on in its
own right it always begins with trade it
created an economy and then everything
quickly sprung up in its wake by 177 the
eastern Han was going downhill with a
stiff wind at its back hopelessly in the
clutches of the eunuchs the later
Emperor's had invited into their
government this was the time of eastern
Han Emperor Ling handling D and the
events leading up to the Yellow Turban
rebellion his son who succeeded him to
the Han throne was the one poisoned by
dong draw Mei has mentioned in past CHP
episodes this was the bitter end of the
once magnificent Han Dynasty first
dong-chul then salt so then it's over
and it's Three Kingdoms time so with
everything up north tangled up in this
state of affairs
no one was minding sure she had down in
Choucha and he began to transform
from loyal official to local warlord
know all the key positions in the
administration were given to his
relatives and allies as I said he was
referred to by the local people as Sivan
King see he was a very enlightened ruler
and kept the place running smoothly and
did a lot to promote Buddhism in Vietnam
even before it really caught on in China
Confucianism had a serious Golden Age
during the early Han Dynasty and this
philosophy got indelibly written into
the source code of Chinese government
and administration that lasted all the
way into the 20th century between 187
and 226 the lands administered by Sharia
had been left to their own devices as
the eastern Han was locked in this
dynasty ending struggle scholars and
educated elites from the north who had
lost confidence amidst the growing chaos
had beaten a path to the south and to
these lands in the southernmost reaches
of China and into the Red River Delta
region
they brought Confucianism and other
northern learning and during the time of
Sharia it really takes hold especially
among the sinus eyes to Vietnamese
elites no surprises there but it's the
eastern Han to send it into further
instability because of his position down
in Jojo xuxa was courted aggressively by
the various contending powers who hope
to win him over to their side
these were halts all who had the Han
Emperor in his clutches and in the east
of China was the kingdom of eastern Wu
led by swim trim and there was also Leo
Bo in Jing province who Bay all trying
to woo
Oceania it's how it's how head showered
shisha with titles and paid him
incredible honors to win him over to his
side it was a very complicated period of
maneuvering and playing everyone off
against one another but suffice to say
sure Shia threw his lot in with swin
Chen of the eastern wall he a dunce
winch and a major solid and helping up
score strategic victory over Leo Bey and
his shoe ha
forces you know something he was amply
rewarded for sure Shion child wore
parted ways as far as how they each view
China child hua had no problem breaking
away and declaring himself independent
sure she stuck with China till the end
he could have pulled off a child halt by
declaring the former nine you have
region independent but that never
happened so sure Shia had become very
powerful down in this part of the world
guangdong guangxi
and northern vietnam because he
controlled these lands he controlled
those unimaginable riches traded at
those ports were the pearl and red
rivers both empty out into their
respective corner of the sea and as long
as you show was alive switchin stayed
true to his commitment not to ever move
on him but after sure she had breathed
his last after a nice long run dying at
eighty nine years of age and 226 all
bets were off and we'll get to that when
he finally did pass a kind of cult grew
around his memory University of Hawaii
professor Stephen o hero called chercher
aquo t' the first vietnamese right
around this time there will suddenly
appear a new player in this history this
all began while all these end of pond
antics were happening in the north and
one of the tribal leaders based in way
son of a high up Viet official killed
the Chinese imperial magistrate there
and seized one of the counties that was
part of the Jun on commander II the
southernmost one in chell province and
this rabble who broke away from this
China controlled land set up a
long-lasting independent Kingdom called
Lin Yi Lum up in Vietnamese so Lin Yi
and there's the picture and they have
their great moment in history
now even though Leonie had broken away
in 192 this renegade kingdom still
maintained relations with China
lynnie by the way was one of the great
traders and rhino horn already so early
in the game the rhinoceros was dodging
humans
around this time down in the Mekong
Delta the Khmer civilization is now
starting to ramp up during the - 40s
Chinese envoys will make it that far
south for the first time visiting the
kingdom that they called Hunan it was
probably a Khmer civilization it was a
trading center already with a long
history and the people in Funan with
great shipbuilders and even built ships
that attacked other places in Southeast
Asia the Indians also sent some kind of
trade mission to Funan that was actually
present during the same time as the is a
Chinese trade mission and it was there
in Hunan during the mid 3rd century that
Chinese and Indians got to have a kind
of interaction for the first time the
kingdom of Funan pivoted in the
direction of India rather than China but
they sent six missions to China in the
3rd century and continue this for a
couple centuries they were Hindus more
than anything else
Linyi Champa foon on the chimere's Lao
this was the world has surrounded the
northern Vietnam lands no Lyons's were
made and broke in and it was an endless
on-and-off warfare and a heck of a lot
of Commerce a Funan will later be
conquered in the six 30s and once that
happens you don't hear about them any
further and the Chinese record following
the demise of foon on the Mekong Delta
region will later be called chenla Jun
la in Chinese but only in the official
Chinese history chenla expanded north
and west into Cambodia for pretty much
all of this early history when you talk
about the mekong delta region and along
the mekong river that's more camere than
vietnamese history
well it's not a pretty ending but once
sure sHIIP asses from the scene swin
Chen wasted no time to fill that
formidable power vacuum as I said the
entire government was stuffed with
shishi has relatives and everyone had
always been beholden to him so without
going into the gory details the only way
student ran
thought he was never going to be able to
take over the place was to decimate sure
she has family every last one of them as
well as his closest supporters if
Eastern Wu was ever going to enjoy the
benefits of that exploding maritime Silk
Road trade that flowed in and out of the
gulf of tonkin where the red river
emptied out they had to move in fast and
hard the eastern wu kingdom hung in
there in China until 280 so they got to
gorge themselves on all the riches and
northern Vietnam not to mention the two
gwang's Guangdong and Guangxi it was
here under the rule of eastern Wu in 226
that Guangdong got itself detached from
Chao Chao and was made a province in its
own right
and then the rump joe-joe province will
contain only southern guanxi in northern
vietnam in a word the eastern wool rule
was not very popular with the locals but
they did have their Buddhism as I said
it came to Vietnam first by sea before
it had come to China it thrived under
xuxa and had only kept getting more
popular the closer you got to the border
with China Mahayana Buddhism held sway
but in the South it was still the Indian
Terra bata school of Buddhism that was
dominant
although Buddhism itself came along in
the late Western Jo dynasty it doesn't
really hit the big time in China until
the nan th all the southern northern
dynasties period and of course the sway
late 6th early 7th century the most
notable legends are bit of history that
comes from this very violent Eastern war
occupation of Viet lands concerns the
lady zhu xi's known as jus T Jin and
also as spot you she lived from 225 to
248 the Vietnamese version of her life
and deeds differs tremendously from the
Chinese official record which passed her
office just another local rabble rouser
who rose up against the wall occupiers
and was then promptly put down
she and the Jun sisters share a similar
status as far as what their D
symbolized trying to free the country
from Chinese rule history books have
compared her to Joan of Arc and she's
called the Vietnamese Joan of Arc in a
lot of books according to the legend she
fought in battle mounted on a war
elephants wearing golden armor and she
put up a noble resistance against the
unpleasant eastern wool occupation but
in the end who forces snuffed out her
uprising but Bachchu
lives on in Vietnamese legends in the
year 263 the kingdom of way defeated Xu
Han now there were only two of the three
kingdoms remaining the combined way and
Shu entities became the the Djinn the
Western Jin that is and as soon as the
three kingdoms period winds down and
SCIM again is secured on the throne
local viet leaders went straight to the
new Jin dynasty court to make peace with
them in order to rid themselves of the
Wu invaders who still occupied them the
Jin sent down a governor and seven
military commanders and soldiers to
establish a regime in northern Vietnam
to challenge wool down there for three
years
Jin and Wu fought it out for control of
the Red River Valley
but after Wu general Tao Wong hijacked a
load of Jin treasure destined to aid the
local resistance in Vietnam and
presented this captured loot to local
officials as a bribe the locals turned
on Jin and wiped them out and will
continue to control northern Vietnam
with tau Wong in charge until the end of
the third century let's not get bogged
down here 280
well Jin of course conquers Wu that's
the end of the Three Kingdoms period and
the Jean rulers left Pao Wang alone down
in the Red River Valley like sure Shia
pal Wong is also credited with leaving
an indelible mark on the administrative
and government structure down in jail
and lasted for centuries as we know it
didn't take that long before the Jin
dynasty started breaking down this is
gonna have a profound impact on China
especially in the south of China where
beginning around 310 320 a massive
migration happens after the fall of the
Western Jin this is the migration you
may recall that first brought the Hakka
peoples south
once the eastern Jin was all formed and
had stabilized they sent forces down to
the Red River Valley to go reassert
control and they put all their proxies
in place all Han Chinese families who
took over the place I mean it happened
time and again whenever things got hairy
up in the north and political power was
transitioning from one center to the
next in China affairs down in chell
province were left in local hands with
all the distractions in the north of
China it didn't take long for warlordism
to develop with powerful vested
interests always trying to show their
independence and brazenly resist changes
or influence from the north from China
and the eastern Jin took a while before
they finally fell the upshot was as we
know from CHP episodes of the past was
the emergence of the first of the
southern dynasties established by Leo
you this becomes known as the leo song
not the most famous of the dynasties but
with respect to China Vietnam history it
was a good time when the Leo song was
established in 420 Vietnam was in its
three hundred and seventy seventh year
of domination by China remember the
first period of Chinese domination began
in one eleven BCE with child was defeat
of Allah the drone sisters put an end to
that but the two sisters star did not
burn bright for long and they were gone
by forty three and then the second era
of Chinese domination began and here in
the air for twenty with the
establishment of the Leo Song Dynasty
Vietnam as I said was now in its three
hundred and seventy seventh year still
not an independent nation the waves of
northern Chinese who made their way to
gel province following the fall of the
Jin brought more of the best fifth
century China had to offer in
agriculture art literature and science
trade up and down the red river boomed
things had been quite stable in gel
during the Eastern Jean and Leo song the
Leo song rulers in Jin Cong today's nun
jing kept the same powerful families in
power in jail as the eastern jin they
didn't want to repeat what swin chen did
there was a new threat to the south of
jail province that involved a constant
battle with invading forces from lien yi
Lum up this was a new power center that
was located near the central part of
Vietnam based in way the southernmost
presence for China in Vietnam was still
the Junon commander II called yet Nam
present-day Guangdong and bend in
provinces bordering Lin e to the north
they were always under attack from
invading forces from next door and Lin
Yi to deal with this at 4:43 the leo
song emperor 1 sent an army south rather
than do what the eastern jin had done
before relying on local warlord armies
to do their bidding doing it this way
the leo song didn't have any loyalty
issues these were chinese troops this
time by 446 they were able to neutralize
Lin Yi as a military threat to their
southernmost region of JAL province Lin
Yi however was not vanquished and the
place continued on as a trading march
for the Southeast Asia region the
kingdom of Lin II Lum up still head
until 793 before they are mentioned for
the last time in the Chinese record so
anyway the Leo song they fell in 479 and
were replaced by the southern Chi 479 to
502 ii of the southern dynasties and
they were locked in a constant battle
their whole time and power and matters
down in jail continued to grow and
develop while things up north remained
in a state of flux but during this whole
non beige hall southern northern
dynasties period of 422 589 the chinese
who had come down to govern and populate
shelter since the end of the Jin we're
beginning to adapt their Chinese ways to
local sensibilities initially
the Chinese had walked in and set up all
these institutions down in Vietnam and
brought in that Chinese cookie cutter
and built up gel Province in their image
well that was then
now these China elites going back - sure
she has time and even earlier after
making their contributions showing the
local Vietnamese down there how to do it
there were more and more being pushed
aside as the indigenous population began
reshaping all this sinuses ation more in
their image and to their liking and a
good amount of this nun han chinese nan
viet culture developing south of gel in
Lin Yi and Hunan had plenty of
opportunities and time to co-mingle with
what was currently developing in Chao
her
Jochem and Yunnan the three areas of gel
province that were shaping the Viet
people who lived in and around northern
Vietnam by this nun Bay Chau northern
southern dynasties period China face
three challenges in Jill one sinus eyes
local Vietnamese elites who have their
own ideas about what was best for
everyone down there two indigenous
people from the fringes of the Red River
plain who were not exposed or not
impressed with Chinese culture and who
didn't want these Han Chinese lording it
over them you know the further you
strayed from the core areas around
present-day Hanoi the less sinus eyes
they were and the third headache
that the Chinese had to deal with worthy
persistent armies from the west of gel
and to the south let me quote Ben cannon
here over the ensuing centuries Joe's
population adopted more of the northern
culture and systems of government they
would also come to regard it as their
own
adapted to local conditions and meld it
with surviving indigenous traditions and
with what they learned through context
with their indianized southern neighbors
Lin Yi Hunan and Champa end quote and
while China was distracted with all the
instability and Wars of the non beige
hull period
this was Viet Nam's chance to bake in
the oven relatively undisturbed and take
stock of all the influx of new ideas
sciences literature and immigrants from
China and the ripple effects of the
growth and foreign trade and the wealth
it brought into the economy the
interaction with foon on all the way in
the south of Vietnam by the Mekong Delta
really heated up during the Liang
dynasty this southern and northern
dynasties period wasn't the most
peaceful time in Chinese history but the
reign of the Liang Emperor rule 502 to
549 was a mostly peaceful and prosperous
time he was one of those occasional
Chinese emperors who became champions of
Buddhism in these cases when an
enthusiastic Buddhist Emperor sat on the
throne the religion was given a platform
to thrive like never before it happened
with the Taoist and Confucian Estela GUP
on the opposition and in funan way down
in the south around the Mekong where
many of the raw materials required in
the Buddhist accoutrement business and
this resulted in a brisk trade between
Liang China and those lands far in the
south not yet part of Vietnam the Liang
gets split up between the southern Liang
and the Western Liang that began around
5:57 after the establishment of the last
of the southern dynasties the Chun but
don't confuse this Western Liang with
the Western Liang of the sixteen
kingdoms period from 400 to 421 the
Western or later Liang let's not get too
worried about this one there's something
like three of them what's important to
our story is that while powerful armies
were pounding each other for control of
China
another hero from Vietnam history rose
to the fore not for long but long enough
his name was Lee boom Lee bun in Chinese
he led a revolt against the occupation
of jail by the Liang dynasty Lee bomb is
better known as Li B and even better
known as Li nom de nom de means southern
Emperor
he came from Bahia people who had
migrated to Jo
a while back during the Wang mang time
in between the Hans 9 to 23 C II and he
served as an official down in gel and
then besides serving as a government
official he later also served in a
military capacity Lee B was like child
wah and that he was a Chinese official
serving in jail who threw his lot in
with the local vietze
and then turned on the Chinese in this
case the Yuen dynasty starting in 541 he
organized an uprising against the Leung
administration and military and spent
the next decade trying to eradicate gel
of any young Chinese presence after his
work was done Li be declared
independence from China and set up a
kingdom that lasted for 60 years and
here in the 6th century the 500s is
where the Vietnam nation and people
start to galvanize into a kind of
political entity not yet a national one
then at 5:44 Li be after ridding gel
province of any Leung presence
proclaimed himself in a nod to child wah
perhaps emperor of nan yet and he named
his new realm vang soon or one twin in
Mandarin 10,000 Springs as in the season
Li be declared himself the nom de or
southern Emperor he set up the capital
at long bean the Hanoi area and once
again the imperial court in Nanjing look
to the south with derision uming that
these Viet subjects down in jail
province dared to put their ruler and
his nom de title an equal footing as the
son of heaven well China did not go
quietly and had every intention of
returning one day to take back this
province so the new van Sun cook or
kingdom of Van soon had to continue to
be vigilant against any Leung attempts
to make a comeback and Champa to their
South who
on the up-and-up and saw an opportunity
with perceived instability up near Hanoi
and promptly allied their emerging
Kingdom with China against Fang soon Lee
Nam Dae ruled a short time from 544 to
548 and he's called the founder of the
Lee dynasty and because later on in
Vietnamese history there'll be another
Lee dynasty this one's called the early
or formerly October 544 Liang indeed
returned this time with a mega force of
a hundred and twenty thousand troops led
by the able general Chan Basia jeong-bok
Dean many of you remember from previous
CHP episodes Chen passion was gonna
later on found the Qin Dynasty but for
now he was a powerful general of the
Liang two previous attempts to overpower
the vang soon forces had failed but for
this third military campaign Liang China
was determined to win back this lost
province Chen passions forces were
indeed successful in this attempt in the
beginning at least they dislodged the
van soon government from long been part
of Hanoi Lee Nam Dae had abandoned the
capital and led his government and army
in the general direction of Laos the Lao
people there well they had allied
themselves with China so the vang soon
forces found no relief out west and
there the hills and mountains of
present-day Laos is where Lee Nam Dae
perished in April 548 from disease a
one-time Emperor and now a hunted man
who was on the run and trying to rally
his forces against the Chinese and
vader's the second emperor who succeeded
Lee Nam Dae was not a Lee but a Jew he
was known as jus Viet Vong Chou Wang
he's credited with taking over from Lee
Nam Dae and putting up a stiff
resistance and ultimately driving the
Chinese out of Van soon and 550 he was
the son of a
rusted military commander and confidant
of Lee nom de Jew Viet Vong which
translates to JA Viet King he was also
known as Zhu guangfo
or jock Wong foo in Chinese he Co ruled
the Lee dynasty Kingdom with Lee Nam Dae
son who was still not yet ripen untested
Vong windgap one of the greatest
generals of his age we'll get to him in
the final episode he had said once that
he drew his inspiration from Joo Guang
hook who mastered these guerrilla
tactics that the Liang Army could not
defeat Chen Bao Shen had to leave the
fight in Jo to head north and deal with
other pressing issues for the Liang
dynasty
so no unified China still things are up
in the air until the sway emerge
victorious in the north and 581
incidentally it was around this time 6th
century that the vietnamese language
still evolving adopted tones and became
a tonal language prior to this the proto
vietnamese language didn't use tones and
there were three in the beginning and
three added later after the tongue like
chinese vietnamese became a monosyllabic
tonal language and for the entirety of
his reign 548 to 571 Zhu vietvodao being
Li family elements in the government and
this made things less than stable and
Cho because he was a Jew and not a li he
always had to watch his back the kingdom
of Ansan also known as the early lead
dynasty finally allowed the political
backbiting in the capital to get the
best of them and by the time of the
final li emperor they were right for the
taking all the warring during the Liang
dynasty took its toll and they were
replaced with the last of the four
southern dynasties and this was the chun
again not very long lasting they tried
to taint jail but to no avail in the end
one of their own yang jin turned on the
Chen dynasty in the south and then the
northern Joe the last of the northern
dynasties and relegates these two to the
dust-heap of Chinese history he then
went on to unify China and found a new
dynasty and this new dynasty was the
short-lived sway in yang Jin became the
founding Emperor sway went deep when he
was ready in 602 this most capable of
China's Emperor sent a massive military
force south led by General Leo Fung to
go attack Vanson this was the start of
the Swale ii war and with that they are
603 marks the start of the third period
of Chinese domination of Vietnam general
EO Fung for his troubles and leading the
sway to victory was made the Viceroy of
JAL province he'll end up dying later on
in a campaign against Champa in the
South Linyi the former Jia lands that
broke away in 192 and became an
independent Kingdom were also
overwhelmed by this sway invasion they
found themselves and sway Wendy's
crosshairs when they dared to stop
paying tribute slave forces landed near
present-day Da Nang and sacked the linee
capital carting away the wealth of that
Kingdom back to the north not soon after
getting whooped by the sway army Lin Yi
will begin to fade away and those lands
will be taken over by the Chams and
incorporated into the rising Champa
Kingdom the early lead dynasty short
lasting though it was gave the
Vietnamese people pride and that it
showed China is powerful and mighty as
that Empire was wasn't so powerful in
that they couldn't be taken on the
Vietnamese didn't get rid of them for
good but they proved it could be done it
happened before and it would happen
again and again in the future whenever
China was distracted by internal
political strife or invasion from the
north
the Vietnamese would always seize the
opportunity to rise up and try to free
themselves from the Chinese yoke after
the sway tamed Vietnam it was still
called Chau Chau Chau province that name
had staying power Vietnam at this point
early 7th century is still only in the
north centered around Hanoi the sway
wasn't very long-lasting and although
they rolled into Vietnam and took the
place over they had their own troubles
in the north after a period of
instability the dynasty was toppled and
that cleared the way for the tang
dynasty the Tong rulers will go down
assume control of Chau Chau and then
they proceeded to run it like a colony
the period of Tong dynasty domination of
Vietnam will be marked by three major
revolts that happened between 722 and
728 despite all internal unrest and
fighting at the edges of the province it
was still quite a golden time in Vietnam
just as it was in the north and Tang
China Jojo got a sort of rebranding and
679 when the Tong rulers set it up as a
protectorate the government had set up a
number of these protectorates around the
fringes of their Chinese Tung Empire
including in Vietnam this one was called
the Protectorate of UNAM Aran Chinese
the Anan duo fool a nun in Chinese means
peaceful south and the government seat
was set up at a place called Thanh Binh
or song ping this was the site of the
old leo song capital during their time
in charge it was located on the south
bank of the Red River near present-day
Hanoi of course up in Tang China even
though the state religion was Taoism it
was another great period for the spread
of Confucianism around the Jojo region
the Tang Dynasty was a period that saw
Chinese culture and learning spread far
and wide to all parts of the world that
were accessible via the Silk Road
in the maritime Silk Road down in the
new protectorate of UNAM this was
especially so the tongue was another
unavoidable period in Viet Nam's history
where a big tidal wave of Chinese
cultural influence came passing through
the region Buddhism had been riding an
unprecedented wave of popularity in
Vietnam in China
ever since the northern and southern
dynasties period the religion got a
major boost during the sway and now in
Tang China there were Buddhist monks all
over the place from all parts of Asia
Chan Buddhism that took off in China
during the 6th century was very much
embraced in gel and Japanese this is
called Zen Buddhism Vietnamese called a
tin thumb it was during the Tang Dynasty
that Champa down in the south began its
rise to serious power they ended up
being the immediate beneficiaries of the
demise of Lee and Yi Champa consisted of
a chain of chum speaking port states on
the central coast of Vietnam the cham
language was of the Austronesian family
Malaya Polynesian if you want to break
it down further
they weren't Viet nor were they Chinese
in 657 during the reign of the 3rd tong
emperor gaozong Chinese sources first
mentioned these people from John Paul
based mostly in Guang nan province as I
mentioned from the 6th to the 10th
centuries there were a number of anti
tongue rebellions and UNAM the big ones
happened in 687 770 and 791 and
continued on well into the eight
hundreds yet despite all this unrest
economically and politically it was a
rather peaceful and thriving time down
there a new threat arose in the mid a
century in southwest China mostly around
good 9 this was a collection of tribes
each with its own mini kingdom these
kingdoms were each called a jalle and in
737 all these
dolls combined to form a new power
center in the southwest called the nan
Chao kingdom-based nerd alley in yunnan
still not clear who these people were
but ethnic minorities of southwest china
or maybe more from thailand they made
themselves enemies of the tongue in no
time at all rapidly expanding as far
west as Burma and into Southwest China
even capturing Chengdu for a brief time
in early 863 nan Chao and maan forces
attacked ila another name for Hanoi the
capital of an Nam heavy damage was
inflicted by nan Chao and the tongue and
nan forces chow chow soon fell to these
combined forces Chinese loyalists mostly
Viet saina sized elites you know who
were related to all the Chinese who have
been migrating to Vietnam ever since
that Sheen days began fleeing north for
safety jo had always been a place to
flee to now people were heading in the
opposite direction but 865 even as the
Tang Dynasty was in desperate straits
politically they still managed to take
back the ILA the capital and defeated
the rebels by 937 the nan Chao kingdom
fizzled out and gave way to the kingdom
of Dali by the late 9th century the Tong
dynasty was on its way out and had been
for a long time and with their waning
power went their influence and
effectiveness down a nun Nam after the
Tong dynasty officially falls in 907
China is broken up again just like
before during the northern and southern
dynasties period but this post Tong era
is known as the Five Dynasties and ten
kingdoms period why sure quoi five
dynasties in the north and ten kingdoms
in the South just China convulsed from
907 to 960 but as history teaches us
time and again one nations loss is
another nations opportunity what
happened next in China Vietnam relations
hold that thought until next time we're
going to
insert the bookmark right here and pick
up next episode with the events that
followed the fall of the tongue it's
funny here I was months ago
thinking I could get this whole topic
covered in a single long-winded episode
micro paucity once again grossly
underestimated this may go to four and
if I wander off on too many tangents
maybe even five episodes the recorded
history podcast network did I mention
that yet recorded history dotnet my
erudite fashionable and good-looking
listeners the history of the Great War
stuff what you tell me the podcast of
rebellion and resistance sounds a little
like this episode the art history babes
Sunday school dropouts
the second decade all about the events
of 1810 to 1820 in the United States you
can't believe how interesting
the explorers podcast dig history
podcast just discovered that one come on
check it all out it recorded history
dotnet a tons of shows there for you all
the terms and whatnot from this episode
English pinyin Vietnamese Chinese all
sitting on the website at tea cup dot
media for this episode those names are
tough I know I made it easy for you go
check that out if you're so inclined ok
my little beauties Lazlo Montgomery
bidding you a fond farewell for this
time I'll be back again same bat-time
same bat-channel
for another loquacious episode of the
China history podcast
you